have you ever wondered who has the
authority to make laws or punish people
who break them when we think of power in
the United States we usually think of
the president but he does not act alone
in fact he is only one piece of the
power puzzle and for very good reason
when the American Revolution ended in
1783 the United States government was in
a state of change the founding fathers
knew that they did not want to establish
another country that was ruled by a king
so the discussions were centered on
having a strong and fair national
government that protected individual
freedoms and did not abuse its power
when the new constitution was adopted in
the structure of the infant government
of the United States called for three
separate branches each with their own
powers and a system of checks and
balances this would ensure that no one
branch would ever become too powerful
because the other branches would always
be able to check the power the other two
these branches work together to run the
country and set guidelines for us all to
live by the legislative branch is
described in article 1 of the US
Constitution many people feel that the
founding fathers put this branch in the
document first because they thought it
was the most important the legislative
branch is comprised of 100 US senators
and 435 members in the US House of
Representatives this is better known as
a US Congress making laws is a primary
function of the legislative branch but
it is also responsible for approving
federal judges and justices passing the
National budget and declaring war each
state gets two senators and some number
of Representatives depending on how many
people live in that state the executive
branch is described in article 2 of the
Constitution the leaders of this branch
of government are the President and Vice
President who are responsible for
enforcing the laws that Congress sets
forth the president works closely with a
group of advisers known as the cabinet
these appointed helpers assist the
president in making important decisions
within their area of expertise such as
defense the Treasury and homeland
security the executive branch also
appoints government officials commands
armed forces and meets with leaders of
other name
all that combined is a lot of work for a
lot of people in fact the executive
branch employees over 4 million people
to get everything done the third branch
of the u.s. government is the judicial
branch and is detailed in article 3 this
branch is comprised of all the courts in
the land from the federal district
courts to the US Supreme Court these
courts interpret our nation's laws and
punish those who break them the highest
court the Supreme Court settles disputes
among states hears appeals from state
and federal courts and determines if
federal laws are constitutional there
are nine justices on the Supreme Court
and unlike any other job in our
government Supreme Court justices are
appointed for life or for as long as
they want to stay our democracy depends
on an informed citizenry so it is our
duty to know how it works and what
authority each branch of government has
over its citizens
besides voting chances are that some
time in your life you will be called
upon to participate in your government
whether it is to serve on a jury testify
in court or petition your congressperson
to pass or defeat an idea for a law by
knowing the branches who runs them and
how they work together you can be
involved informed and intelligent
Oh